It is Tuesday the 26th, testing, testing.
This is Wade Birch, Director of Student Counseling Services.
I was in error.
It's the 27th, and we are in Henderson Hall.
And I have the pleasure and honor of chatting with Wade Birch.
the director of the Student Counseling Center for almost three decades and hope to record as much as possible about his experience in that very important task.
Wade, please introduce yourself to the reader or the hearer of this material.
Give us a biographical summary of background growing up,
What did mom and dad do?
Where did you go to high school, college?
What did you do before you came here?
Okay.
Well, I was born in New York City and attended early elementary school in Queens, PS 134, which will get your loyal blood rolling.
However, grew up most of my life out in suburban Long Island, Nassau County.
Attended the University of Tampa in Florida where I was a history major.
graduated from there in 1960, then went to Florida State University during the summers primarily and received a Master of Science degree in Counseling and Guidance.
And then the other part of my academic training was a second master's degree at Indiana University in Educational Psychology in 1968, and then finally a Doctor of Education degree in Counseling and Guidance in 1970.
Where'd you do that?
Doctorate at Indiana?
Yes, at Indiana University, right.
And professional experience prior to coming had been, I was a junior high school teacher in Tampa, Florida, taught history, government, and geography.
and at Stranahan High School in Fort Lauderdale.
I was a high school counselor for two years.
Then I was a graduate assistant at Indiana University in the Reading and Study Skills Center, and then finally moved over to work full-time in the counseling service at Indiana University.
And is that where you were when you came here?
No, I actually was at East Texas State University.
John Koldis hired me out of Indiana University to become director of counseling at East Texas State University in Commerce, which is now Texas A&M University Commerce, which is very interesting because in retrospect I've worked for the A&M system for 30 years.
So I met John in 1971 when he hired me.
And he came to A&M in 1973, and I remember what a din it cast over all of us in student affairs when he left to come to A&M.
We were not happy with A&M at that point, but understood his move and that kind of thing.
Who contacted whom about the A&M position for you?
John Koldis.
discovered after he had been here for a while that A&M did not have much in the way of personal counseling for students.
And he tried to get Austin Curley and the old Counseling and Testing Center in under Student Affairs.
He had gone to President Williams,
and proposed a reorganization of Student Affairs that would have included the Counseling and Testing Center.
My understanding, and this is second hand, my understanding is that Mr. Curley wanted to remain in Academic Affairs.
I would presume, A, because of the clout of Academic Affairs and probably the funding of Academic Affairs, and so that was not going to happen.
And John told me then in a letter that he was actually spending time counseling students as a vice president.
And he said, and while I think he was probably very naturally good at it, that was not why he was hired.
So he asked me to author a proposal for the development of a personal counseling service.
And I sent him about a 10-page document about a month and a half later, which he took to President Williams.
And President Williams then agreed with the idea of setting up a companion counseling service alongside of the Counseling and Testing Center.
I was then asked to come down and interview with President Williams.
And before I came, John told me two things.
One was to cut my hair.
It was slightly halfway over my ears.
And the other one was to not tell Dr. Williams that I had been through a divorce.
And those were the two things.
He said, once you get the position, he said, then, you know, you can do what you wish with your hair and that kind of thing.
He said, but that will be appropriate.
So I did so.
I remember walking into what was the old administration building in the front of the campus.
I remember setting foot in Dr. Williams' office and I can to this day feel the depth of the carpet in that office and the heavy wood furnishings.
It clearly reeked of power.
There was no question about it.
Dr. Williams was very civil and kind.
He was also very much to the point.
I remember he said three things to me.
He said, number one, if you don't like students, you shouldn't be at Texas A&M.
And I had been in education all my life, so that was not a problem.
He said, if you're anti-military, you would find it very difficult to be at A&M.
Well, I was in ROTC and was not anti-military.
And then the third thing he said sort of just to me revealed Dr. Williams'
understandable lack of knowledge about college counseling because he said something to the effect of we do not want to turn Texas A&M University into a state mental health facility.
And of course we, you know, institutions of higher education are not here for that purpose.
The state has mental health centers, state mental hospitals, all of those other things.
But he wanted to make those three points clear to me and he did.
And it was probably a 15 or 20-minute conversation.
And then John Koldis and I left.
And shortly thereafter, I guess, John got the word from Dr. Williams that it was satisfactory that I'd be hired.
And so that's the way that happened.
As far as you're aware, there was no search committee.
Right.
And there was no advertisement.
That's right.
Was there even a job description?
I don't recall one.
I've talked to John about that and of course today it's very different.
John's premise was that he had gone through a search for a counseling center director two years ago at East Texas State.
He was very happy with me and the search that he had made therefore he saw no reason to go back and initiate another search.
Now that would not fly today but in those days it did and so that was his response.
In that conversation did you see any of the Williams humor?
I honestly don't recall that.
I remember him being very affable and it's amazing.
I have frequently not felt totally comfortable around college presidents and I was aware of the enormous power that he had but he didn't seem to
invoke it in any outward manifestations or anything.
You were just aware that this was a man with a lot of power.
But he did his best to make me feel very comfortable.
And you had the impression that his mind was open when you went in the room as to whether or not you were the appropriate person.
I really didn't know.
I just presumed that
Dr. Koldis had talked with Dr. Williams and they had had conversations and that sort of that groundwork was laid so that he was just interested in probably casting his eyes on me and seeing if I had just two eyes and one nose and two ears and that sort of thing and you know didn't behave oddly and that sort of thing.
In some ways it may have been a pro forma interview but on the other hand I doubt that Dr. Williams ever engaged in things that didn't have meaning to them.
And he didn't give you any directions, don't do this or don't do that?
No, he did not.
Other than that one thing of we don't want A&M turned into a state mental health facility.
All right, and then about how long before you learned of the result?
I don't remember the exact time.
It was very shortly thereafter that John called me and said everything was fine, that he would have a letter of offer of the position.
And as I reflect back,
When John asked me to write the proposal that was shared with Dr. Williams, I remember John's letter said, I hope you understand the implications of this, meaning that if the proposal was agreed upon, that he would like me to come down and start the service.
And the position that was offered you matched pretty well what you had described.
Yes.
Yes, it did.
Very much so.
These will be the only dollar question.
Okay.
Beginning salary?
Yes.
How much?
I earned $23,000 a year.
And I was given two staff positions, actually three, and they were paid, I think, at 19.
And the 23,000 was, compared to East Texas State, I think I was making about, oh, 18,500 or something.
So this was an enormous windfall, just enormous.
Where were you to be quartered?
That was interesting.
John's office was in the first floor of the YMCA building.
I was sent up to the third floor of the YMCA building.
Bob Melcher and some other people who were in student affairs were to evacuate the space on the third floor of the Y building so that we could have it.
But I actually spent six weeks sitting in a conference room, in John's conference room.
I brought with me a staff member that I had had at East Texas State who was a priest.
Actually he had gotten his second doctoral degree up at East Texas State and so he joined me and then I inherited the assistant dean of women whose name was Tish Self, Dr. Patricia Self.
And so the three of us for a while sat in that conference room
organizing intake forms, you know, all kinds of demographic kinds of information forms, a lot of things that I'd used at Indiana and East Texas and massaged them and I remember the very first day we were on duty we had a student referred to us and Michael Jamel, Dr. Michael Jamel, the priest, actually counseled the students sitting on the stairs that led up to the third floor the building because we had no private offices.
I got an office
Six weeks after I came here and Michael and Patricia got an office about another four weeks after that.
When I came here, I did not have a pencil, a paper clip, a secretary, anything.
Ran into a wonderful young woman, 23 years old, extremely mature, 23 going on 40, who made my life just so much easier.
It was really good.
and describe the task as you perceived it and planned it at that time.
Yeah, I ran into some interesting conversations.
You know, being a psychologist, I'm very attuned to listening to people's humor because a lot of truth comes out in humor, and it's easier for people to say things that they wouldn't say in a very direct, serious tone.
but it's more palatable through humor.
And I remember one faculty member sort of intoning that, well, now that you psychologists are here, you're probably going to be recruiting all these crazy students to come to A&M, as if I were out on Texas Avenue Highway 6 saying, hey, come on, if you're a little off balance, come to A&M.
You know, we need business, which, of course, was ridiculous.
I do remember an ag professor.
saying to me that he understood the work I did because he had a young man recently who was not doing well in some particular course and it was due to the fact that he'd broken up with his girlfriend and his concentration was impaired.
And I kept waiting for something else, and it never came.
And he described that as kind of weird, and I thought, that's mom and apple pie.
So it was interesting.
The other thing I used to hear bantered around when we got here, and people scratched their head about the three of us being here, was that Aggie women didn't get pregnant.
So another thing that happened, John took me on the road to a number of Aggie clubs, and I described the counseling service.
And I remember vividly one Aggie coming up and proudly showing me his hand that there was no Aggie ring on it.
because women had been admitted, and by God, he was not going to be wearing the ring.
And my honest reaction having a son and daughter was, geez, I want as good for my daughter as I want for my son.
I didn't say anything, but that's, you know, I sort of looked strangely at him.
It was very interesting.
May I digress back to the interview part just for a moment?
I was told a little about the conservatism of Texas A&M,
When I had breaks in my interview process that John had me go through after seeing Dr. Williams, I remember one of the things I did in my free time was to stop any male that had a mustache or a beard.
just to ask them how they were being treated and that kind of thing.
And I actually got favorable responses.
They said in essence nobody was hassling them.
But it was my way of checking out just exactly how far does this conservatism go and was pleasantly relieved when I found that out.
So going back to the original point,
All of those little experiences sort of drove home to me that what we ought to be doing was to do our work very well and probably pretty quietly and just gradually become part of the environment.
And that was essentially the modus operandi that we used.
As you settled in, were there many opportunities where someone asked, what in the world are you all about?
Oh, yeah.
People have a... It's amazing the perceptions and misconceptions that people have of counseling services.
I mean, all the way from they think you're going to be brought in a room and lay you down on a Freudian couch or use some kind of medication on you or something like that.
And so there's so much to dispel, so many myths to dispel.
Now, I will say this, the current generation, what I'm finding is in my professional life,
Less and less do you have to dispel those myths because counseling is now so pervasive in our society and in the schools that it's not a big deal.
But in the earlier days, you were constantly trying to say, this is kind of what happens in a counseling session.
This is the kind of thing we talk about.
This is what we expect of a client.
This is what the client can expect of me.
This is how we dress.
a number of sessions, just explaining, trying to demystify the experience.
That happened, and if it didn't happen, if I wasn't questioned about it, I would always address it in any presentation I made because I knew there were people in the audience who those thoughts were lurking.
And you assumed that the primary kinds of services you were going to offer would include what?
That was interesting.
We had, as I mentioned, you had the Counseling and Testing Center, which I understand historically was established around 1960.
I understand that it was an outgrowth of the fact that some faculty in the smaller colleges were a little bit upset, well more than upset, about undecided students who came to A&M or assigned faculty advisors
And of course the preponderance of them would go to the larger colleges like engineering and agriculture and surprisingly they would wind up being agricultural and engineering majors.
And so liberal arts was very uptight about that and so I understood in 1960 they decided to set up this neutral and also professionally prepared group of people to help students make a choice of major and that sort of thing.
So that Counseling and Testing Center, when I came here as Director of the Personal Counseling Service, they retitled themselves the Academic Counseling Center, and we functioned side by side until 1982.
I have just realized I lost the drift of your question.
I got into so much detail.
What you thought the primary... Oh, the primary, yeah.
It was interesting.
I presume because of our titles, and I went and met with Mr. Austin Curley, the Director,
I presume that we would do strictly personal counseling and they would do strictly choice of major, choice of career, learning skills, testing.
And when I met with Mr. Curley in his office, he sort of threw me a curve ball.
I was surprised.
He said, no.
He said, I presume you'll be doing some career counseling and some of those kinds of things that we do over here.
It's just that the source of the students, he thought, should be different.
any referrals from academic affairs since he was in the division of academic affairs ought to go to the academic counseling center any referrals from student affairs student life or whatever the rest of you ought to come to the personal counseling service so that was a that was a conceptual thing that i was not prepared for and uh i i was a little relieved at it because
Philosophically, I hate to dichotomize a student.
That's why our current student counseling service, you can get learning skills help, choice of major, choice of career, personal counseling, and crisis intervention all in one place.
And so this enabled us not to dichotomize a student, not to say, okay, now that we've talked about this relationship you've been in going amok,
I understand you're having trouble choosing a major.
I'm sorry, we can't talk to you.
You've got to go over to that other center.
So this allowed us not to have to do that, which was wonderful.
Did John Koldis or anyone else give you any guidelines, any do's and don'ts, any advice as you were beginning?
No, not really.
John, I think John, because he'd worked with me for two years, knew that I was...
a pretty prudent individual, not likely to go off in any odd tangents.
John really was pretty much hands-off, but I think that's because he had worked with me for two years.
Up at East Texas State, frankly, they had a center that needed healing and rehabilitating, and he saw the work that I did there.
I mean, I'm sure that when I had meetings with him that he may have warned me about certain kinds of politics in the institution or certain sacred cows or certain things to be careful of, but that was not a focal point at all of our conversations.
He really turned me loose to build a professional psychological service.
Now, this is a real diversion.
He didn't give me any information on this, and I don't know.
I was among those who interviewed him.
How did he and A&M link up?
Do you have any idea?
I don't.
I understand.
I understand that through meetings of like the Texas Association of College and University Student Personnel Administrators to CUSPA that John began having interaction with A&M people and apparently somehow his reputation and his personhood
became known, and I think Jack Williams already knew who he was seeking out when he hired him.
I think so.
Because he had heard that.
Because I and a few other skeptics are saying, golly, we can find somebody that's in a real university.
Right, yeah.
Why don't we go into little old East Texas State?
Right, sure, sure.
By the way, John, interestingly, I'm told that John's claim to fame at East Texas State, one of his claims to fame was that he designed a
massive campus parking system.
He was an instructor in the physical education department and or professor and and did a wonderful job and of course then his relationships with students caused him to be selected as dean of students and all that sort of thing.
Describe John Koldis as a as a leader.
Make believe that I didn't know him.
Yeah.
Personality and attitudes and values.
An exceptionally extremely engaging individual.
Someone who, while he would have a point of business to take care of, he would do it in an extremely affable manner.
Really put a person at ease, but also you never forgot what his position was, etc.
So it was an interesting kind of
of balance that I saw.
You never were lulled into that this was a casual coffee shop conversation you were having, but on the other hand, he was extremely attentive.
I alluded before to the fact that
that John would have made a master therapist.
His listening skills and patience are exceptional.
Did you ever see him lose that affability?
Yes.
I saw him lose it twice with me.
I didn't think that was bad over 20 some odd years of working with him.
Over what?
One of them was that I quickly realized that our staff,
were dealing with students who had problems of a psychiatric proportion and that we were getting into, very mixed up into suicidal ideation, suicide attempts and that.
And I really saw the need for psychiatric backup or consultation.
And at that time, I think it was pretty clear to me that John was tiptoeing into that area because it was one thing to bring psychologists to A&M,
in my estimation, then if he were now quickly going to say, hey, we need some kind of psychiatric backup, that the administration might wonder, whoa, what kind of direction are we going in, you know, and that kind of thing.
And so I got worried because it was a bunch of psychologists who were making decisions sometimes that were quasi-psychiatric medical decisions.
And I thought that really set the staff up for liability, expressed that to John, asked for some part-time help,
And John would say, well, something like, well, timing's not quite right, or this, that, and the other thing.
And this would drag on into months and months and months.
And we had a staff retreat once, right near lunchtime.
And John said, well, are there any other issues anyone wants to throw out?
And I said, yeah, John.
I said, I'm still very anxious to get some psychiatric backup.
And he came forth with, well, the timing isn't quite right.
It was the same thing I'd been hearing.
And I just lost it.
And I blurted out, OK, I've kept my memos to you, meaning I've got in writing, there's a need.
And if anybody kills himself, it's not going to come back on me.
And he knew what I was saying.
And he said something like, what the hell good is that going to do you?
Or something like that just flashed a moment of anger.
The meeting broke for lunch shortly thereafter and he came up to me in the lunch line and said, hey, he used to call me Wado.
He said, Wado, I'm sorry.
He said, I understand how critical this is to you.
So it was a very, very quick thing.
The other time that he got upset with me, we had a student, a male student client here that was somewhat psychologically unstable, but we had him...
We had him in good control, and then we went into spring break and we lost contact with him for nine days, the weekend before and after spring break and that whole week.
He proceeded to go into one of the female Corps residence rooms with rope and that, not with weapons, but with ropes and that, and barricaded himself in a room with two women.
And, of course, interestingly, the women overpowered him.
and later we John immediately debriefed with everyone involved and when it came my turn to talk I said well I said you know legally because I'm licensed by the state of Texas I can break confidentiality only with medical personnel and law enforcement personnel I said there was no reason to break any confidentiality with any medical authorities because it wasn't on medication or anything like that and and his behavior had
previously been reported to police so you know there was there was really nothing that that I could have done more and he said something the effect of Wade if those two women had been killed you know
what in the heck is all of that, you know, that professional law and all that, what good is all that stuff?
You know, he was upset, understandably upset about the welfare of the women.
Out of that actually came a very good policy and procedure where, that our staff still operates on here today.
We strongly encourage, not require a student who's had made a threat made against them, to go to the vice president's office and report that to one member of that staff.
they're not encumbered by the confidentiality laws and therefore they can set in motion a whole range of protective things.
So those were the two times, the only two times that I can remember.
The only other time I remember was once on a golf course at a division golf tournament where I was having a terrible, I was doing so badly that I was shooting worse than Malin Sutherland.
And John knew I was frustrated and he came up to me in my face and quietly said,
When my game starts going bad, the first thing I do is just slow everything down.
And I looked at him and I said, uh-huh.
And he knew I wasn't ready to receive anything.
And he said, hey, you're nothing but a GD stubborn Yankee.
You know, those are the only times I, but that was said in good humor.
All right.
As you, as you moved in to the quarter slowly.
Yeah.
Administratively, you reported directly to Koldis?
To Koldis, yes.
He was the vice president.
Right.
Describe the senior, who were the other senior people reporting to him?
Oh, the first year I was here, Charles Powell was, I think they still had the dean of men.
No, no.
Now, one of the things when John Colas came here that he gave up were the Dean of Women and Dean of Men titles.
Because I think, as I understood it, the Academic Affairs folks didn't like the idea of Dean titles being in Student Affairs.
So I think that concession was made.
But Charles Powell was the Director of Student Affairs, I think it was called at that time.
Toby Reeves was the Assistant Director.
She had been the Dean of Women.
He had been the Dean of Men, I believe.
So they were two of the principals.
Wayne Stark was here as head of the MSC.
I'm trying to think the University Police Department that we had in the division.
I know Tom Parsons was one of the early ones, but I can't... No, it was another gentleman, a trained law enforcement officer.
Gosh, I cannot recall his name, but very, very pleasant, very kind gentleman.
He was there.
Carolyn Adair was the Director of Student Activities, and she was fairly new at that position.
Claude Goswick was the Director of the Student Health Service.
What was, of that group, were they generally optimistic, pessimistic?
Oh, with Coldest, you couldn't be, pessimism was not permitted, and I say that benignly.
Carolyn Dare was extremely bubbly and effervescent, younger certainly than she is now, and full of energy, and Claude Goswick was very good to work with.
Toby Reeves was very positive.
No, it was an upbeat group, and John was really... I think John at that time was really trying to fashion a more professional student affairs group than had previously existed under General Hannigan, which had been more...
I think quasi-military cronies who were put in certain, you know, offices.
I remember seeing the Office of Civilian Student Activities and thought, boy, that's really different.
You know, being at Florida State and Indiana, I'd never seen that designation, but I understood it in the context of A&M.
But John really was, and I remember this, I remember that John, I don't know that he'd admit it,
But I think he had to be somewhat stressed by the very delicate balance of hiring A&M people in student affairs versus outside people.
And I know particularly in the residence halls, my impression was that there was a lot of pressure put on him to hire Aggies to keep, again, to keep the spirit going, not take any chances with that lapse.
And I think John sort of did some Aggies and then he grabbed some outsiders and, you know, he sort of walked the line.
And did those of you reporting to him, you all met once a week?
Yes, once a week, just as we had when I was at East Texas State.
He continued that tradition.
And as you began, did you have some other institution as a model for...